Add blog post announcing GATs non-incompleteness and calling for testing (#869)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2021-07-28-GATs-stabilization-push.md

---
layout: post
title: "The push for GATs stabilization"
author: Jack Huey
team: the Traits Working Group <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/compiler#wg-traits>
---

# The push for GATs stabilization

Where to start, where to start...

> Let's begin by saying: this is a very exciting post. Some people reading this will be overwhelmingly thrilled; some will have no idea what this feature is; others might be in disbelief. The [RFC] for this feature *did* get opened in April of *2016* (and merged about a year and a half later). In fact, this RFC even predates *const generics*. Don't let this fool you though: it is a powerful feature; and the reactions to the tracking issue on Github should maybe give you an idea of its popularity (it *is* the most upvoted issue on the Rust repository):

Reviewer: Besides the mention in the title, the subject of this post only gets referred to as "this feature" in the entire first paragraph. Additionally, what the "GATs" feature is is not explained until after line 30. I would make a call out to "generic associated types" in the first paragraph and explain that if you're unfamiliar with what GATs are, we'll be explaining it below.

Author: I added a bit to address this. Does it look better now?

Without making promises that we aren't 100% sure we can keep, we have high hopes we can stabilize this feature within the next couple months. But, we want to make sure we aren't missing glaringly obvious bugs or flaws. And that's why we need *your* help.

Okay. Phew. That's the main point of this post and the most exciting news. But as I said before, I think it's also reasonable for me to explain *what* this feature is, what you can do with it, and some of the background and how we got here.

## So what are GATs?

**Note: this will only be a brief overview. The [RFC] contains many more details.**

GATs (generic associated types) were originally proposed in [RFC 1598][RFC]. Put simply, they allow you to define type, lifetime, or const generics on associated types. If you're familiar with languages that have "higher-kinded types", then you could calls GATs *type constructors on traits*.

> To jump into an example of GATs, here is a popular use case: a `LendingIterator` (formerly known as a `StreamingIterator`):

Reviewer: It would be good to explain what about this is not possible currently. Perhaps showing how since the lifetime of `&mut self` and `Self::Item` are not tied together in the current `Iterator` trait, you run into interesting issues.

Author: I did that below!

```rust
trait LendingIterator {
    type Item<'a>;
    fn next<'a>(&'a mut self) -> Option<Self::Item<'a>>;
}
```

With this, you could create a line iterator over a `String` without cloning each line...
```rust
struct LineIterator { ... }
impl LendingIterator for LineIterator {

>     type Item<'a> = &'a str;

Reviewer: This is a bit of a strange example since the [Lines](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/str/struct.Lines.html) already exists. It probably won't be clear to those unfamiliar with GATs why this is different.

Reviewer 2: maybe the example should be `<[T]>::windows_mut`:
```rust
struct WindowsMut<'a, T: 'a> {
    slice: &'a mut [T],
    start: usize,
    window_size: NonZeroUsize,
}

impl<'a, T: 'a> LendingIterator for WindowsMut<'a, T> {
    type Item<'b> = &'b mut [T];
    fn next<'b>(&'b mut self) -> Option<Self::Item<'b>> {
        let start = self.start;
        let retval = self.slice[start..].get_mut(..self.window_size.get())?;
        self.start = start + 1;
        Some(retval)
    }
}
```

Reviewer: This could be good. We should include the error if you try to implement this with `Iterator`:

```
error[E0495]: cannot infer an appropriate lifetime for lifetime parameter in function call due to conflicting requirements
  --> src/lib.rs:12:22
   |
12 |         let retval = self.slice[start..].get_mut(..self.window_size.get())?;
   |                      ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
   |
note: first, the lifetime cannot outlive the anonymous lifetime defined on the method body at 10:13...
  --> src/lib.rs:10:13
   |
10 |     fn next(&mut self) -> Option<Self::Item> {
   |             ^^^^^^^^^
note: ...so that reference does not outlive borrowed content
  --> src/lib.rs:12:22
   |
12 |         let retval = self.slice[start..].get_mut(..self.window_size.get())?;
```

This shows that `self` is being borrowed for some lifetime and `Self::Item` is borrowed for the lifetime `'a`, but we have no way to tell the compiler how these lifetimes relate. With GATs we can explicitly say that `self` and `Self::Item` are borrowed for the same lifetime.

Author: I took the advice here and made the main example the `windows_mut`. I gave an example how you might try to implement it today, the error you get, and how you actually implement it with GATs. How does it look?

Reviewer 2: looks good to me!

```

Or you could create an iterator over overlapping subslices of an array...
```rust
struct SubSliceIterator<T> { ... }
impl<T> LendingIterator for SubSliceIterator<T> {
    type Item<'a> = &'a [T];
}
```

As another example, imagine you wanted a struct to be generic over a pointer to a specific type. You might write the following code:

```rust
trait PointerFamily {
    type Pointer<T>: Deref<Target = T>;
    fn new<T>(value: T) -> Self::Pointer<T>;
}

struct ArcFamily;
struct RcFamily;

impl PointerFamily for ArcFamily {
    type Pointer<T> = Arc<T>;
    ...
}
impl PointerFamily for RcFamily {
    type Pointer<T> = Rc<T>;
    ...
}

struct MyStruct<P: PointerFamily> {
    pointer: P::Pointer<String>,
}
```

We won't go in-depth on the detail here, but this example is nice in that it not only highlights the use of types in GATs, but also showcases the use of the trait bounds (as you can already do on associated types).

These two examples only scratch the surface of the patterns that GATs support. If you find any that seem particularly interesting or clever, we would love to hear about them over on [Zulip]!

## Why has it taken so long to implement this?

> So why has this *really* taken nearly four years to get to the point that we are now? Well, it's hard to put into words how much the existing trait solver has had to change and adapt; but, consider this: for a while, it was thought that to support GATs, we would have transition rustc to use Chalk (which is experimental and uses logical predicates to solve trait goals) as its trait solver.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So why has this *really* taken nearly four years to get to the point that we are now? Well, it's hard to put into words how much the existing trait solver has had to change and adapt; but, consider this: for a while, it was thought that to support GATs, we would have to transition rustc to use Chalk (which is experimental and uses logical predicates to solve trait goals) as its trait solver.
```

> So why has this *really* taken nearly four years to get to the point that we are now? Well, it's hard to put into words how much the existing trait solver has had to change and adapt; but, consider this: for a while, it was thought that to support GATs, we would have transition rustc to use Chalk (which is experimental and uses logical predicates to solve trait goals) as its trait solver.

Reviewer: Link to [chalk](https://github.com/rust-lang/chalk)? I would also describe Chalk as "a potential future trait solver" for rustc in addition to it being experimental and such.

Author: Oops. I made the link at the bottom but didn't actually link it. And changed the wording a bit.

For reference, here are some various implementation additions and changes that have been made that have furthered GAT support in some way or another:
- Parsing GATs in AST ([#45904])
- Resolving lifetimes in GATs ([#46706])
- Initial trait solver work to support lifetimes ([#67160])
- Validating projection bounds (and making changes that allow type and const GATs) ([#72788])
- Separating projection bounds and predicates ([#73905])
- Allowing GATs in trait paths ([#79554])
- Partially replace leak check with universes ([#65232])
- Move leak check to later in trait solving ([#72493])
- Replacing bound vars in GATs with placeholders when projecting ([#86993])

> And to further emphasize the work above: many of these PRs are large and have considerable design work behind them. There are also several smaller PRs along the way. *But*, we made it. And I just want to congratulate everyone who's put in effort on this one way or another for that. You rock.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And to further emphasize the work above: many of these PRs are large and have considerable design work behind them. There are also several smaller PRs along the way. *But*, we made it. And I just want to congratulate everyone who's put effort into this one way or another. You rock.
```

   |                      ^^^^^^^^^^
note: but, the lifetime must be valid for the lifetime `'t` as defined on the impl at 6:6...
  --> src/lib.rs:6:6
   |
6  | impl<'t, T: 't> Iterator for WindowsMut<'t, T> {
   |      ^^
```

However, it does compile fine if you were to implement this using the `LendingIterator` trait from before:

```rust
impl<'t, T: 't> LendingIterator for WindowsMut<'t, T> {
    type Item<'a> where Self: 'a = &'a mut [T];
    fn next<'a>(&'a mut self) -> Option<Self::Item<'a>> {
        let retval = self.slice[self.start..].get_mut(..self.window_size)?;
        self.start += 1;
        Some(retval)
    }
}
```

As another example, imagine you wanted a struct to be generic over a pointer to a specific type. You might write the following code:

```rust
trait PointerFamily {
    type Pointer<T>: Deref<Target = T>;
    fn new<T>(value: T) -> Self::Pointer<T>;
}

struct ArcFamily;
struct RcFamily;

impl PointerFamily for ArcFamily {
    type Pointer<T> = Arc<T>;
    ...
}
impl PointerFamily for RcFamily {
    type Pointer<T> = Rc<T>;
    ...
}

struct MyStruct<P: PointerFamily> {
    pointer: P::Pointer<String>,
}
```

> We won't go in-depth on the detail here, but this example is nice in that it not only highlights the use of types in GATs, but also shows that you can still use the trait bounds that you alread can use on associated types.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We won't go in-depth on the details here, but this example is nice in that it not only highlights the use of types in GATs, but also shows that you can still use the trait bounds that you alread can use on associated types.
```

Without making promises that we aren't 100% sure we can keep, we have high hopes we can stabilize this feature within the next couple months. But, we want to make sure we aren't missing glaringly obvious bugs or flaws. We want this to be a smooth stabilization.

Okay. Phew. That's the main point of this post and the most exciting news. But as I said before, I think it's also reasonable for me to explain *what* this feature is, what you can do with it, and some of the background and how we got here.

## So what are GATs?

**Note: this will only be a brief overview. The [RFC] contains many more details.**

GATs (generic associated types) were originally proposed in [RFC 1598][RFC]. Put simply, they allow you to define type, lifetime, or const generics on associated types. If you're familiar with languages that have "higher-kinded types", then you could call GATs *type constructors on traits*.

To jump into an example of GATs, here is a popular use case: a `LendingIterator` (formerly known as a `StreamingIterator`):

```rust
trait LendingIterator {

>     type Item<'a> where Self: 'a;

Reviewer: Hmm why is the where clause necessary?

Reviewer 5: Annoying, right? The short version is that the impls need to know that people can only use "reasonable" `'a` lifetimes here. e.g., the example impl below uses `type Item<'a> = &'a [T]` or something, but that is only valid if `T: 'a`. So what's to stop someone from doing `Foo::Item<'static>`, which might not be legal? This where clause, that's what. It'd be nice if we could find a way to avoid folks having to type it, though!

}
impl<'t, T: 't> Iterator for WindowsMut<'t, T> {
    type Item = &'t mut [T];
    fn next<'a>(&'a mut self) -> Option<Self::Item> {
        let retval = self.slice[self.start..].get_mut(..self.window_size)?;
        self.start += 1;
        Some(retval)
    }
}
```
then you would get an error.
```rust
error[E0495]: cannot infer an appropriate lifetime for lifetime parameter in function call due to conflicting requirements
  --> src/lib.rs:9:22
   |
9  |         let retval = self.slice[self.start..].get_mut(..self.window_size)?;
   |                      ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
   |
note: first, the lifetime cannot outlive the lifetime `'a` as defined on the method body at 8:13...
  --> src/lib.rs:8:13
   |
8  |     fn next<'a>(&'a mut self) -> Option<Self::Item> {
   |             ^^
note: ...so that reference does not outlive borrowed content
  --> src/lib.rs:9:22
   |
9  |         let retval = self.slice[self.start..].get_mut(..self.window_size)?;
   |                      ^^^^^^^^^^
note: but, the lifetime must be valid for the lifetime `'t` as defined on the impl at 6:6...
  --> src/lib.rs:6:6
   |
6  | impl<'t, T: 't> Iterator for WindowsMut<'t, T> {
   |      ^^
```

> 

Reviewer: Can you add one sentence summarizing the error? 

"The errors above indicate that the lifetime of `&mut self` (known as `'a`) and the lifetime of `Self::Item` (known as `'t`) are unrelated and the compiler cannot prove that `'a` lives as long as `'t` does. Without this proof, the item returned from the iterator might be allowed to live longer than the slice we're iterating over!"

Reviewer 2: hmm, I would have stated it in terms of `impl Iterator for WindowsMut` would end up creating overlapping mutable references, since `Item`'s lifetime doesn't prevent calling `next` again while holding the previously returned reference. `LendingIterator` does prevent calling `next` until the previously returned `Item` is dropped.

}
```

> We won't go in-depth on the detail here, but this example is nice in that it not only highlights the use of types in GATs, but also shows that you can still use the trait bounds that you alread can use on associated types.

Reviewer: ~alread~ => already
